Conflict is inevitable.
It is a fact of life and
occurs in all kinds
of relationships.
Effective communicators are
distinguished not by a lack
of conflict with
others but rather
by how they
handle conflict.
Avoiding conflict altogether
would seem, at first glance,
to be the optimal approach
to successful and fulfilling
human communication;
however, it is often the
case that through the
process of negotiating
conflict human relationships
grow stronger.
Some of the greatest
achievements of humanity
have been the result of the
successful negotiation of
inevitable human conflicts.
The United States
Constitution, for one
example, was the result
of a lengthy process of
negotiation and
conflict resolution.
Conflict management is a
vital skill
for all human interaction.
Unresolved destructive
conflict can have a
decidedly negative impact
on our wellbeing but mental
health improves when we take
a constructive approach
to conflict.
The practice of constructive
conflict is an essential
component of our
interpersonal communication
skills.
Conflicts can also be
opportunities for us to
become more effective and
proficient communicators and
this can offer possibilities
for personal growth.
The ideal approach is to
strike an effective balance.
People should engage in
logical argument to resolve
conflicts over matters of
greater import but avoid
making an issue over matters
of little consequence.
Unfortunately, we rarely
encounter this ideal
attitude toward conflict
in our day to day lives.
People can change their
conflict behavior.
Your approach to conflict
is not an inborn set of
responses but rather a
developed repertoire of
communication skills that
are learned, refined, and
practiced in everyday life.
In this video, we will take
a look at some of these
behaviors and responses.
We'll cover common sources
of conflict, patterns of
conflict, and styles of
conflict management with an
emphasis on communication
skills for constructive
conflict management.
Definitions for
conflict vary.
One definition is: a state
of being that arises when
everyone's core beliefs,
attitudes, values, habits,
and/or goals differ from
those of another person with
whom one is interacting.
For many, the term conflict
has a negative connotation
but conflict is not
necessarily a negative
circumstance nor does it
necessarily apply hostility
or violence.
Conflict is one aspect of
communication
between human beings.
Some common misconceptions
about conflict are that
conflict if left alone
will resolve itself.
Confronting an issue or
person is always unpleasant.
Anger is always negative
and destructive.
How one communicates in a
conflict situation will
determine the outcome and
lasting impact
of that conflict.
It is our communicative
behaviors that will either
aggravate a conflict or
resolve
it in a productive
manner.
Understanding human
communication is fundamental
to understanding conflict
because our communicative
behaviors both create
and manage conflict.
Let's take a look at a real
world conflict scenario and
examine the role
of these behaviors.
Kelly and Christine, two
18 year olds from the same
hometown in Long Island,
were thrilled when both were
accepted into their dream
college in the Big City.
The girls were giddy with
excitement when they found
out they'd also be allowed
to room together in the
freshman dorm.
It was going to be an
awesome year...or was it?
Hey, Chris, look at this.
The girls see an
advertisement from a big
wireless phone company and
reason that they can both
save a good deal of money on
their monthly expenses if
they just pool their
resources and get themselves
a family calling plan for
their cellular service;
however...
Oh, well, you can only have
one person's name
on the account.
Well, we can put it in mine.
Chris,
don't worry about it.
We need
a credit card.
Mine got sent to my parent's
house and they're going to
bring it when they
visit next weekend.
Would it be cool
if we used yours?
Sure, we can use mine.
With that, the account is
open and the girls are
officially on the network.
They were starting a new
life in the Big City at the
college they had dreamed of
since they were in middle
school and, thanks to their
new family calling plan,
they could talk to one
another on the phone as much
as they wanted to for free.
There was no way they'd use
up all 700 of their shared
minutes in one month.
Things were going great
until one day toward the end
of September a surprise
came in the mail.
Their first bill for
their family
calling plan with current
charges in excess of $400.
Whoa!
I thought this was supposed
to be $70 a month.
The girls went over their
allotted minutes which
resulted in overage charges
but it was the next line
which really threw
her for a loop.
Where it read
total amount due,
the balance was
zero dollars.
The balance is zero.
How is the balance zero?
Because it's already been
charged to my credit card
and now I'm overdrawn.
Kelly!
As we analyze
scenarios of human conflict,
we must bear in mind one of
the great overarching truths
of human communication,
that it is context which
determines content.
For example, the characters
in our skit, Kelly and
Christine, have been friends
since they were little girls
back in Long Island where
life was familiar
and comfortable.
They knew their roles and
what was expected of them in
that context.
However, in this situation,
our two young protagonists
find themselves in an
entirely new
and unfamiliar context.
A pragmatic approach to
the analysis of human
communication looks at human
communication in a manner
similar to that of the
behaviorist psychologists.
In this approach, human
communicative behavior can
be thought of as a series
of speech acts that become
patterned over time.
For example, whenever I
utter a phrase, that phrase
is a speech act.
That act often as not
elicits a speech act in
return from another person;
what many term feedback.
The pragmatist terms
both speech acts together
in interact.
Our day to day interacts
tend to fall into familiar
patterns and we become
accustomed to communicating
in that way.
Any sudden change in those
patterns of interaction,
particularly coupled
with a change in physical
environment, can be
very disruptive to our
communicative behavior and
can easily lead to conflict.
The social constructionist's
perspective is even more
effective for analyzing
human conflict.
Social constructionists see
human communication as a
process of world building.
In other words, we construct
our worlds linguistically in
an ongoing process
of negotiation.
Kelly and Christine's
conflict is really the
opening salvo in the
negotiation of their new
roles and the rules
they are to live by.
They have vast differences
in the way they approach time.
Timely paying of bills for
example and the way they
conceptualize fiscal
responsibility.
These are common
areas of conflict.
Human conflict tends to
arise due to differences in
people's core beliefs,
values, attitudes, habits,
and goals.
These differences commonly
flare up in the areas of
personal time orientation.
Some people are habitually
punctual while others are
habitually late.
Some people are night owls
burning the
midnight oil while others
are larks
up at the crack of dawn.
The manner in which we
conceptualize and negotiate
our personal space.
This includes the most
intimate of personal spaces;
our own bodies as well as
the physical space
of our surroundings.
A contentious area that
can easily be fraught with
conflict is our
money and finances.
So, what happens once
a conflict is
actually underway?
When the two roommates
finally caught up with one
another later that day,
Christine was in a decidedly
unpleasant mood as she told
Kelly about the problem.
Kelly, our cell phone
bill came today.
It was $400, not $70!
The cell phone bill?
Well, don't
worry about that.
There's still a few
weeks before it's due.
Kelly, nothing is
due in a few weeks.
They just charged the
balance to my credit card.
So, what's the problem?
The problem is that now I'm
officially over my limit and
I have to pay a
penalty right now.
What are we going to do?
Well, do you have any money?
I don't have anything.
I told you my parents only
give me an allowance once a
month and my work study
doesn't kick in until next week.
You have to give
me something.
Just chill out would you!
Chill out!
What do you mean chill out?
This is $400 that you and I
don't have, either of us.
The conversation
gets heated.
The argument reaches its
destructive peak when Kelly
spouts a particularly nasty
insult at her lifelong friend.
Are you out of your...
That's why you don't have
any friends other than me.
And Christine
storms out of the room.
Christine calls her mom, not
looking so much for advice,
but looking for a
sympathetic ear to whom she
can vent.
Hey, Mom, okay,
can you believe it?
I mean...what,
what did she think?
Did she think that I have
to be responsible
for everything?
I mean that..that the money
would magically drop from
the sky when the
bill appeared?
I don't...
Well, honey, didn't you guys
talk about this beforehand?
It's a big responsibility
to have a credit card and a
cell phone.
Why didn't you get
separate plans anyway?
Please don't lecture.
I know.
We just...we thought
we were saving money.
I...
Well, I guess that didn't
work out for you,
did it sweetie?
Uh, Mom....
Christine's
mom is absolutely right.
Many communication scholars
site incompatible goals as
one source of
human conflict.
Oftentimes however these
goals exist at an almost
subconscious level and are
almost never articulated
until a problem arises.
Christine and Kelly thought
they shared a reasonable and
compatible goal when, almost
on a whim, they decided to
pool their resources and
share a cell
phone calling plan.
But, in their new lives
at college, they are in
uncharted waters and clearly
they've made some mistakes.
Mistakes that could have
easily been avoided with
some improvements in their
communication styles.
As we have underscored,
conflict is a part of life,
and so the question is not
whether or not conflict
happens at all, but
how we manage it.
Conflicts can be managed
either constructively
or destructively.
When conflict is managed
constructively, it can
actually be a
valuable experience.
In constructive conflict,
the issue is kept focused on
direct actions that can
be taken and compromise.
Perhaps even complete
problem solving
can be the outcome.
Constructive conflict can
yield many positive effects
such as an increase in
motivation, improved ability
to identify and solve
problems, increased skills
and knowledge, greater
creatively, incentive for
personal growth, a deepening
of friendships
and other relationships.
These can never be realized
however if conflict is
ignored or poorly handled.
In such instances, conflict
becomes detrimental
or even destructive.
Destructive conflict yields
negative effects such as;
a decrease in our
productivity, an erosion of
trust between friends,
secrecy and reduced
information flow, personal
anxiety and depression,
wasted time, a fracturing
of our friendships
or other relationships.
There are two main
destructive patterns both
described as spirals.
Escalatory spirals pervade
destructive conflict and
avoidance spirals reduce
the chance
for productive outcomes.
Several characteristics
of spiraling destructive
conflict can be identified.
The first moments of
conflict set the tone for
the ensuing situation.
If a conflict begins with a
critical statement such as
"you always" or "you never",
the conflict will probably
escalate quickly.
A constructive complaint
can be more helpful.
Defensiveness, contempt, and
inflexibility characterize
destructive conflict.
When one person withdraws
from the interaction and
refuses to cooperate, this
is called stonewalling.
A competitive cycle of
dominance and subordination
results in
destructive conflict.
When we analyze conflict, we
often speak about styles
and tactics.
Styles are patterns of
response and behavior.
Tactics are
the specific moves
within a
general approach.
The basic choice of style is
whether to avoid or engage
but neither one is always
necessarily the right choice.
They can both be viable
options depending on the
circumstance or context.
The key idea is that
it is always a choice.
One chooses when it's
appropriate to avoid for the
sake of protection or when
it is appropriate to engage
and extend oneself towards
a constructive outcome.
The hallmark of constructive
conflict is flexibility.
As we have emphasized,
successful communicators are
distinguished by their
ability to manage situations.
People often get locked into
their familiar patterns but
having the flexibility to
transition between styles
will increase the chances
for constructive resolution.
So how do these ideas apply
to the scenario
we are witnessing?
Let's take a look.
Once Christine and Kelly
realized there was a
conflict between them, each
of the girls was guilty of a
negative response,
specifically that of
withdrawing also
called avoidance.
Kelly was the first to
exhibit withdrawal but she
did so in response to
Christine who confronted her
with the bill.
Understandably, Christine
was upset and she was
justified in confronting
Kelly but it was the manner
in which she confronted
or engaged Kelly that
precipitated the destructive
spiral to follow.
We have all heard the phrase
"it's not what you said,
it's the way you said it."
Sense of tone, attitude,
volume, etceteras that
confounds most communicators
comes under the umbrella
term of paralinguistics
which is one of the
categories of nonverbal
communication.
The manner in which we say
things is important but
Christine wasn't thinking
along those lines on the day
of the big argument.
Christine was visibly angry
when she approached Kelly.
Many scholars would term
Christine's initial approach
to the conflict as one of
forcing or dominating.
Whatever term one prefers,
this conflict strategy is
characterized by
egocentrism; concern only
for one's own wellbeing
and a lack of empathy or
understanding for
the other party.
When Kelly saw how heated
her friend was, her initial
instinct was to backpedal
to, in a word, withdraw
verbally
from the conflict.
In so doing, she perhaps
unintentionally invalidated
Christine's genuine concern
over the bill situation.
This is what we call a
disconfirming response.
It was an unfortunate
tactic since it only fueled
Christine's anger and led
to their nasty argument.
The argument was a result of
Kelly switching gears and
matching Christine's forcing
tactic; what some scholars
also term competing.
At the height of the
argument, you will recall it
was Christine who withdrew
after Kelly had hurled her
hurtful insults.
Christine's withdrawal led
to a protracted silence or
avoidance spiral between the
two and delayed for a long
time any hope of resolving
their differences but
eventually resolve
them they do.
Let's take a look.
Kelly, this
is really stupid.
We've been friends
since the second grade.
We can't let a cell phone
bill get between us.
We can find a way to
work something out.
Yeah.
As usual, I guess
you're right.
So, what was the
agreement they reached?
Christine came up with a
compromise solution which
would involve considerable
fiscal sacrifice
on her part.
Christine was willing to
make these concessions since
she genuinely loved her
friend and didn't want to
risk losing her.
Since Kelly was in poor
financial shape, Christine
would allow her to pay back
the overage charges in $50
monthly increments while she
would have to take care of
the credit card bill
personally in the meantime.
She did get some help from
her mom in the form of a
timely check.
Mom, being an understanding
soul, realized that kids
were going to make mistakes
on the way
to becoming adults.
Christine and Kelly then
reworked
their wireless contract.
Going forward, Christine
would have the 700 minute
monthly plan to herself but
Kelly's phone number would
no longer be on
her calling plan.
They converted Kelly's
number to a pay as you go
plan which would force her
to pay closer attention to
the number of minutes
she was using.
Though she resented being
removed from the plan at
first, Kelly conceded and
accepted the
compromise gracefully.
Though not a perfect
solution, the girls were
satisfied
with the outcome
and thus
resolved their conflict.
We should not always regard
conflict as negative.
It can offer great potential
for creativity and growth.
On the positive or
constructive side of
conflict management, most
scholars site two categories
of conflict strategy;
compromise or problem
solving collaborating.
The distinction between the
two approaches is that with
compromise each party must
give a little ground and
forgo some of their personal
goals while true problem
solving results in a win-win
situation
for all parties concerned.
But the lines of distinction
between these strategies can
be quite blurry at times.
In the real world of day
to day communications and
experiences, the hard and
fast categories of the
academic don't
always fully apply.
Whether the outcome of a
conflict is defined as a
compromise or a problem
fully solved depends largely
on the perceptions of
the parties involved.
Communication practices that
will encourage constructive
approaches emphasize dialog.
Dialog demands skillful
listening and working to
respect the other person's
perspective even though you
may disagree with what the
other person is saying.
Because dialog is a process
in which people speak and
listen to one another to
help clarify the situation,
it leads to collaboration.
Other tools for constructive
conflict management are a
positive attitude,
flexibility, continual
evaluation and reframing.
Reframing means looking
through a positive lens to
describe a situation
constructively.
Mediation is a form of
resolution that can help
with disputes which
individuals cannot resolve
on their own in which an
impartial, neutral, and
mutually accepted third
party is asked to assist
with reaching an agreement.
The mediating third party
helps to isolate the issues
and to develop alternatives
and options for a resolution
that is acceptable to
both disputing parties.
The mediator does not
make decisions but rather
facilitates the conflict
participant's own abilities
to reach an agreeable
settlement.
Examples of mediators are
a marriage counselor, an
arbitrator, or a
referee in sports.
Many times a simple apology
can end the conflict.
Though often perceived as an
admission of wrong doing, a
sincere apology delivered
at the right time can be a
powerful way to improve the
quality of a relationship.
The act of offering an
apology demands that we look
at our own actions in a new
light and empathize
with others.
Even more fundamentally, you
can learn to prevent many
destructive conflicts.
Skills for prevention can
help to keep a conflict from
becoming destructive.
There is no
recipe or formula.
The prevention of conflict
relies on our overall skills
of excellent communication.
In conclusion, skills and
strategies for preventing,
managing, and resolving
conflict can be developed
and sharpened over time.
Conflict can be resolved.
It can turn out better than
you imagine and it can be an
opportunity to learn.